Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) – Interview Notes

1. What is OOP?

Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is a programming approach where a program is designed using classes and objects. It combines data and the functions that operate on that data into a single unit.

OOP is useful for building large and complex applications because it makes code:

Organized
Reusable
Maintainable
Scalable
Interview Answer

“OOP is a programming paradigm that organizes code around classes and objects. It helps us manage complex applications by providing concepts such as encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, and abstraction.”

2. Why do we use OOP instead of only Procedural Programming?

Procedural programming works well for small and simple programs, but as the project becomes larger, managing many functions and data becomes difficult.

Object-oriented programming helps us organize code into classes and objects, which improves:

Code reusability
Maintainability
Scalability
Organization

It also provides concepts like:

Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism
Abstraction
Simple Interview Answer

“We use OOP when a project becomes complex. It helps us organize data and functions together using classes and objects, making the code more reusable, maintainable, and scalable.”

3. What is a Class?

A class is a blueprint or template used to combine attribute and methods.

It defines:

Attributes → Data/properties
Methods → Behaviour/functions
Example
class User:
    def _init_(self, name, email):
        self.name = name
        self.email = email

Here:

User → Class
name, email → Attributes
_init_() → Constructor
Computing Example

In a social-media application, User can be a class containing:

name
email
password
login()
logout()
Interview Answer
What is a class?

“A class is a blueprint or template that defines the properties and behaviours of objects.”

4. What is an Object?

An object is an instance of a class.

It is the actual entity created from the class.

Example
class User:
    def _init_(self, name, email):
        self.name = name
        self.email = email


user1 = User("Rahul", "rahul@gmail.com")
user2 = User("Priya", "priya@gmail.com")

Here:

User → Class
user1 → Object
user2 → Object

Each object can have its own data.

Easy Way to Remember

Class = Blueprint
Object = Actual instance created from the blueprint

Interview Answer

“An object is an instance of a class. For example, User is a class, while user1 and user2 are objects created from that class.”

5. Important Features of OOP

The four major concepts of OOP are:

1. Encapsulation

Wrapping data and methods together and controlling access to the data.

2. Inheritance

Allowing one class to acquire properties and methods from another class.

3. Polymorphism

The same method or interface can behave differently depending on the object.

4. Abstraction

Hiding complex implementation details and showing only the required functionality.

Easy Memory Trick

EIPA

E → Encapsulation
I → Inheritance
P → Polymorphism
A → Abstraction
6. Encapsulation
Definition
Encapsulation:

Encapsulation means combining data and methods inside a class and controlling direct access to the internal data.

The main idea is:

Protect the data and control how it is accessed or modified.

In Python, we can use __ to indicate internal/private-style attributes through name mangling.
three methods
private attribute
public attribute 
protected attribute

Instagram Example

Imagine an Instagram account.

An account may contain sensitive information such as a password.

We don't want other parts of the program to directly modify the password.

Instead, we can provide a method such as change_password().

class InstagramAccount:
    def _init_(self, username, password):
        self.username = username
        self.__password = password


    def change_password(self, new_password):
        self.__password = new_password

Here:

username → Attribute
__password → Internal/private-style attribute
change_password() → Method used to modify it
Interview Explanation

“For example, in Instagram, password-related data can be kept internal, and we can provide methods to control how the password is changed. This is an example of encapsulation because the data and methods are grouped together and access to the internal data is controlled.”

Easy Way to Remember

Encapsulation = Protect/Control Data

7. Inheritance
Definition

Inheritance allows a child class to acquire attributes and methods from a parent class.

It helps with:

Code reuse
Reducing duplicate code
Creating relationships between classes
Parent Class → Child Class

The child gets common functionality from the parent.

LinkedIn Example

Imagine LinkedIn has different types of users:

Job seekers
Recruiters
Employers

All users may have common functionality such as:

Login
Logout
Update profile

We can create a common LinkedInUser class.

Then JobSeeker can inherit from it.

class LinkedInUser:
    def login(self):
        print("User logged in")




class JobSeeker(LinkedInUser):
    def apply_job(self):
        print("Applied for a job")




user = JobSeeker()


user.login()
user.apply_job()

Here:

LinkedInUser → Parent class
JobSeeker → Child class
login() → Inherited method
apply_job() → Child-specific method
What happens?

The JobSeeker class doesn't need to rewrite the login() method.

It automatically gets it from LinkedInUser.

Interview Answer

“Inheritance allows a child class to reuse the properties and methods of a parent class. For example, in LinkedIn, JobSeeker can inherit common functionality such as login() from LinkedInUser and add its own functionality such as apply_job().”

Easy Way to Remember

Inheritance = Child gets from Parent

8. Polymorphism
Definition

The word polymorphism means “many forms.”

It means the same method or interface can perform different actions depending on the object.

Easy Example

Suppose we have a method called:

play()

Different objects can implement play() differently.

YouTube Example

On YouTube, different types of content can be played:

Normal video
Live stream

Both can have a play() method, but the behaviour can be different.

class Video:
    def play(self):
        print("Playing video")




class LiveStream:
    def play(self):
        print("Starting live stream")




for content in [Video(), LiveStream()]:
    content.play()

Output:

Playing video
Starting live stream

The same:

content.play()

produces different behaviour depending on the object.

Normal User → watches with ads
Premium User → watches without ads

This is polymorphism because the same method name watch_video() behaves differently for different objects.

Interview Answer

“Polymorphism means many forms. It allows the same method or interface to behave differently depending on the object. For example, in YouTube, different content types can have a play() method, but the implementation can be different for each type.”

Easy Way to Remember

Polymorphism = Same action, different behaviour

9. Abstraction
Definition

Abstraction means hiding unnecessary or complex implementation details and showing only the essential functionality to the user.

The user focuses on:

WHAT the system does

instead of:

HOW the system does it

PhonePe Example

Suppose you make a payment using PhonePe.

You:

Select the receiver
Enter the amount
Enter authentication details
Confirm the payment

You don't need to know the internal implementation such as:

Network communication
Bank server communication
Encryption
Transaction processing
Payment verification

All those complex details are hidden from you.

You simply use the payment interface.

That is abstraction.

Interview Answer

“In PhonePe, when we make a payment, we only interact with the payment interface. We don't need to know how the application communicates with the bank servers or processes the transaction internally. The complex implementation is hidden from the user, which is abstraction.”

ATM Example of Abstraction

When using an ATM, you:

Insert your card
Enter your PIN
Select Withdraw
Enter the amount
Receive cash

You don't need to know:

How the ATM communicates with the bank
How the bank verifies your account
How the transaction is processed
How the ATM communicates with the banking network

You only interact with the required interface.

Interview Answer

“An ATM is a good example of abstraction. We select options like withdraw or check balance without knowing the internal communication between the ATM and bank server. The complex implementation is hidden, and only the required functionality is exposed.”

Easy Way to Remember

Abstraction = Hide complexity, show essentials

10. Difference Between Encapsulation and Abstraction

This is a very common interview question.

Encapsulation	Abstraction
Focuses on protecting data	Focuses on hiding complexity
Controls access to data	Hides implementation details
Combines data and methods	Shows only essential functionality
Example: Instagram password	Example: ATM / PhonePe
Easy Trick

Encapsulation → HOW to protect data
Abstraction → WHAT to show to the user

Interview Answer

“Encapsulation focuses on bundling data and methods together and controlling access to the data, whereas abstraction focuses on hiding complex implementation details and exposing only the necessary functionality.”

11. Difference Between Class and Object
Class	Object
Blueprint/template	Actual instance
Logical definition	Real entity
Doesn't represent a specific instance	Represents a specific instance
Example: User	Example: user1
Easy Example
class User:
    pass


user1 = User()
user2 = User()

Here:

User = Class

user1 and user2 = Objects

Interview Answer

“A class is a blueprint used to create objects, whereas an object is an actual instance of that class.”

12. Complete OOP Example
class Employee:
    def _init_(self, name, salary):
        self.name = name
        self.salary = salary


    def display(self):
        print(self.name, self.salary)




emp1 = Employee("Rahul", 50000)
emp2 = Employee("Priya", 60000)


emp1.display()
emp2.display()

Here:

Employee → Class
emp1 → Object
emp2 → Object
name, salary → Attributes
display() → Method
_init_() → Constructor
13. Four Pillars of OOP – Quick Revision
Encapsulation

Protect and control data.

Example: Instagram account/password.

Inheritance

Child class gets properties and methods from parent class.

Example: LinkedInUser → JobSeeker.

Polymorphism

Same method, different behaviour.

Example: YouTube play() for different content types.

Abstraction

Hide complex implementation and show essential functionality.

Example: PhonePe payment / ATM withdrawal.
1. Attribute

An attribute is a variable that stores data or properties of a class or object.

Example:

class Student:
    college = "BVRIT"   # attribute
2. Method

A method is a function defined inside a class that performs an action.

Example:

class Student:
    def display(self):   # method
        print("Hello")
Types of Methods
3. Instance Method

An instance method is a method that works with object/instance data. It uses self as its first parameter.

class Student:
    def display(self):
        print("Student details")


s1 = Student()
s1.display()

Deals with: Instance/Object

4. Class Method

A class method is a method that works with class-level data. It uses cls as its first parameter and is created using @classmethod.

class Student:
    college = "BVRIT"


    @classmethod
    def display(cls):
        print(cls.college)

Deals with: Class

5. Static Method

A static method is a method that is independent of both class and instance data. It does not require self or cls.

It is created using @staticmethod.

class Student:


    @staticmethod
    def add(a, b):
        print(a + b)

Deals with: Neither class nor instance

Easy way to remember
Type	Deals with	Keyword	Decorator
Instance Method	Instance/Object	self	None
Class Method	Class	cls	@classmethod
Static Method	Neither	None	@staticmethod